Generalized functions for getting, setting, and finding environment variables (#798)
NREL/GreenHEART: docs/misc_resources/debugging_environment_variables.md

The following sections will demonstrate how to debug environment variable issues and alternative ways to set environment variables.

- [Environment File: Getting Default Supported Filepaths](env_var_debug:get_default_fpaths)
- [Environment File: Check Default Supported Filepaths](env_var_debug:is_default_fpath)
- [Environment File: Setting Environment Variables prior to H2I Simulation](env_var_debug:nonstandard_fpath)
- [Debug Missing Environment Variables](env_var_debug:debug_missing)
- [Manually Setting Environment Variables](env_var_debug:manual_setting)

## Non-standard environment file location or name

If your getting an error for a missing environment variable and your environment variables are stored in a `.env` file, then the `.env` file may not be found in the expected location.

(env_var_debug:get_default_fpaths)=
### Get the supported default filepaths

> The code below shows how to print a list of the default filepaths that H2I will look for the environment file.

Reviewer: Nice, I love this!!

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.18.1
kernelspec:
  display_name: native-ard-h2i
  language: python
  name: python3
---

(env_var_debug:intro)=
# Environment Variables: Non-standard Configuration and Debugging Issues

> If errors are encountered with models that use environment variables, such as a missing API key or other credential, this may be because the environment variables were set using a non-preferred method or your workflow may be different. The different approaches to setting environment variables is documented [here](https://h2integrate.readthedocs.io/en/latest/getting_started/environment_variables.html). Some of the non-preferred methods to set environment variables may require that environment variables be reset when your environment is activated. If you're setting environment variables with a .env file, then errors may occur because the file is not found.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If errors are encountered with models that use environment variables, such as a missing API key or other credential, this may be because the environment variables were set using a non-preferred method or your workflow may be different. The different approaches to setting environment variables is documented [in the getting started guides](#environment_variables:environment-variables). Some of the non-preferred methods to set environment variables may require that environment variables be reset when your environment is activated. If you're setting environment variables with a .env file, then errors may occur because the file is not found.
```

- [Manually Setting Environment Variables](env_var_debug:manual_setting)

## Non-standard environment file location or name

If your getting an error for a missing environment variable and your environment variables are stored in a `.env` file, then the `.env` file may not be found in the expected location.

(env_var_debug:get_default_fpaths)=
### Get the supported default filepaths

The code below shows how to print a list of the default filepaths that H2I will look for the environment file.

```{code-cell} ipython3
from pathlib import Path

from h2integrate import ROOT_DIR

default_directories = [ROOT_DIR, ROOT_DIR.parent, Path.cwd(), Path.home()]

print("Supported default environment file locations: \n")
for folder in default_directories:
    print(folder/".env")
```

(env_var_debug:is_default_fpath)=
### Determine if environment file is in supported default filepath

If you want to determine whether your environment file is placed in one of the valid locations, the code below will tell you if your environment file is found in any of the default directories:

```{code-cell} ipython3
from pathlib import Path

from h2integrate import ROOT_DIR

> default_directories = [ROOT_DIR, ROOT_DIR.parent, Path.cwd(), Path.home()]

Reviewer 2: These imports and defaults are already created in the previous cell, so are unnecessary here. Redundant definitions in cod examples is fairly uncommon unless it's putting an entire workflow in one place at the very end.

Author: I see what you're saying. The intention is that each of these blocks could be copy-pasted to a new python file for a user to run for debugging - that is why there is redundant code. I expect this page to be most useful to folks who are potentially a bit newer to python - so I'm trying to keep it very clear the exact chunk of code they can run to debug stuff. Let me know if you still think the redundant code should be avoided.

I could also make this a python formatted code cell rather than an executable markdown code cell (so it doesn't actually run when the docs build) but I wanted to have it run so that if any future changes would break this code, then we remember to change it.

Reviewer 2: If the cell doesn't need to run, then I'd say make it a python code block rather than executable cell like most of this documentation page, but this explanation works for me.

Author: done! pushed it up!

```python
from h2integrate import H2IntegrateModel
from h2integrate.core.env_tools import get_environment_variables

environment_fname = "myenv.env"

# Set the environment variables prior to running H2I
env_vars = get_environment_variables("NLR_API_KEY","NLR_API_EMAIL", file_name=environment_fname, set_variables=True)

model = H2IntegrateModel("01_onshore_steel_mn.yaml")
model.setup()
model.run()
```

(env_var_debug:debug_missing)=
## Debugging a missing environment variable
For any method of setting environment variables, you can use the code below to determine if your environment variables are being loaded properly or being set.
```{note}
If you're setting environment variables with an environment file in a non-standard location or filename, refer to the section above on how to specify the inputs to the `get_environment_variables` function.
```

Below shows an example of checking if the `NLR_API_KEY` and `NLR_API_EMAIL` environment variables are being **found** and what the values are of the variables that are found:

```python

> import os

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

from pathlib import Path

from h2integrate.core.env_tools import get_environment_variables

# Check if environment variables are being found
env_vars = get_environment_variables("NLR_API_KEY","NLR_API_EMAIL",set_variables=False)
if not env_vars:
    print("No environment variables found")
else:
    print("Found environment variables with the values below:")
    for key, val in env_vars.items():
        print(f"Environment variable `{key}` is set to `{val}`")

```

Below shows an example of checking if the `NLR_API_KEY` and `NLR_API_EMAIL` environment variables are being **set** and what the values are of the variables that are set:

```python
import os
from pathlib import Path

from h2integrate.core.env_tools import get_environment_variables

# Check if environment variables are being set
get_environment_variables("NLR_API_KEY","NLR_API_EMAIL",set_variables=True)

nlr_api_key = os.environ.get("NLR_API_KEY", None)

> nlr_api_email = os.environ.get("NLR_API_EMAIL", None)

Reviewer 2: `None` is the default value for `.get()` when there isn't a match, so it's not really needed.

Author: yeah - I suppose my justification is again that I'm trying to make this extremely user-friendly (and thinking about users who may be newer to python) so I'm trying to give them more clues about how these functions work even if it is a bit unnecessary.

Reviewer 2: My opinion is that's overkill given it's just how dictionaries operate in Python, but I'll let you decide since it's not wrong by any means.

> nlr_api_email = os.environ.get("NLR_API_EMAIL", None)

Reviewer 2: How come we aren't making use of the values returned (or not) from the `get_environment_variables()`?

Author: This is intended to be a really comprehensive debugging workflow. In the code block above, a user can determine if the environment variables are being **found** properly. If the variables are being found, but for some reason the user is still getting errors with (for example) API calls, they can check what the values that the environment variables values are being **set** to. 

This can be helpful for debugging if someone encounters a weird case where the environment variables are being found properly but not being set OR the value that the environment variables are being _set to_ is different than the value the environment variables are _found_ as.

Author: I think either way works. I suppose that I prefer using the `os.environ.get` method so that a) users learn about this function if they weren't aware of it before and b) a user can figure out if theres some weird bug in `get_environment_variables` in setting the environment variables (maybe its being set to some value in `get_environment_variables` but its getting modified somewhere else so that when `os.environ.get` is called the value is different.

Reviewer 2: This works for me.
